- aluno 1: "Essa foi a minha primeira contribuição para o kernel do Linux e
achei uma experiência muito interessante. Gostaria de agradecer ao professor
#### e ## integrantes do grupo #### e #### por terem tornado esse processo de
aprendizado possível, além claro dos membros do FLUSP que criaram e
disponibilizaram os tutoriais utilizados, compartilhando o conhecimento que eles
adquiriram ao longo dos últimos anos."

- aluno 1: "As someone still interested to keep contributing to the Linux
ecossystem, but not really into contributing to the kernel itself, there are a
lot of ways we can help to build this empire apart from the very kernel."

- aluno 1: "This [first] phase was tough due to my lack of experience with
such tools and also some issues I faced while following the tutorials. However,
I would say it was a really cool experience. I’ve tweaked a lot with Linux in
the past, but never really went low enough to modify a kernel tree and deploy it
into a new image to test it. This was a really nice opportunity and experience
and overall and I believe that anyone who is interested on Linux in general
would love it."

- aluno 1: "I had the opportunity to not only learn more about bash scripting
(which was a lot by the way), but also learned more about development workflow
in general. Working in a project at the same time with mutiple other developers
really makes you fully understand why git actually exists and forces you to
learn and keep track of potential conflicting changes. I’m sure that I did more
rebases in the last few months than the previous 4 years combined. It was great
overall and, as much as I find bash confusing and weird sometimes, it was a nice
experience to have."

- aluno 1: "It was an overall great experience. There were moments of
frustration and confusion, but we managed to go through every obstacle thanks to
classmates’ support and determination to look up solutions for every issue we
eventually had. I’ve learned a lot about git and bash during these last months
and I feel my knowledge about FOSS and Linux in general was significantly
improved."

- aluno 2: "The change itself was simple, but we had problems while trying to
compile the modified code. The errors indicated that the macro
device_for_each_child_node_scoped() did not exist. We tried to find the file
where the macro should be, but we didn’t achieve success. Analyzing the
modification introduced by the last commit, we found out that the branch we were
in was not updated since 2022. Because of that, the desired macro hadn’t yet
been implemented. We tried to reach an updated branch so we could send the
modification, but this was only clarified during the class with the monitor’s
help. After obtaining the correct branch for development, we only had to re-do
the modification and send the patch."

- aluno 2: "My experience with the tutorials was not easy in certain moments.
In some cases it was caused by poor attention while reading it, or peculiarities
of my machine, and also due to the tutorial not covering some aspect (or not
being clear). I think the task was not easy by nature, with the amount of
diverse problems that may appear along each step involved in the kernel
compilation and deploy, so it would be difficult to go through all the tutorials
without any setbacks. Maybe if in each tutorial step, there was a detailed
description of possible problems/difficulties that might appear, it would be
easier for those who are following the tutorial to detect when there was a
mistake in some step or when the error is well known and easy to solve."

- aluno 3: "The planning of the course to contribute to the Linux ecosystem
personally pleased me because I wanted to experience the process of trying to
contribute to the Kernel, and having a course with room for that was very
helpful."

- aluno 3: "It also broadened my perspective on how to evaluate an open-source
project to understand how that project is maintained, observe if the maintainer
is active and receptive to new contributors or more closed off to external
contributions, and whether a project has a structured group responsible. Another
lesson was about being patient when contributing and understanding that all
contributions are important. It’s not necessary to only contribute with new
features; we can also contribute by solving small issues in the code."

- aluno 3: "But the most interesting point was generating an interest in
understanding the codes of the libraries I use the most, at least to clone the
repository, explore the code, and possibly contribute to them in the future."

- aluno 4: "After finishing the two first tutorials again, I’ve been
frustrated by the same problems: I wasn’t able to install new modules at the
VM’s kernel.  After more debugging and frustration, I decided to switch back to
####’s series of tutorials, but unfortunately, I still wasn’t able to execute
libvirt due to incompatibilities.  Instead of spending even more time trying to
setup the environment in my machine, I switched to pair programming, and went to
collaborate with a colleague who had their setup working."

- aluno 4: "[talking about the Debian packaging phase] The first attempt at the
VM approach worked seamlessly, until the third step of building the package.
Since we didn’t expect the process to consume much disk space, we assigned only
6 Gb to the VM, and much less to the /boot disk. The dependencies required to
build the package had to be installed at the /boot disk, and resizing this
specific disk wasn’t very easy. We had to restart again.  At the second attempt,
we supplied 20 Gb to the VM’s disk. The build process went fine, but we weren’t
able to run the package’s automated tests.  Other colleagues had similar
problems, and with no easy solution, we decided to stop here and continue to
focus in the other contributions of the course."

- aluno 5: "We started the semester working on the linux kernel. This was by far
the project with the greatest learning curve. Before contributing we spent a few
weeks understanding how the kernel was structured with its many subsystems,
learning about a complex contribution workflow (with different trees and cycles)
and setting up the environment with virtual machines to build and deploy the
kernel. Once we made our patch we still had to learn how to send the patch to
the correct maintainers and how to check for updates and replies. It was a lot
to learn, but it was definetly worth it. Once we sent a contribution to the
kernel, every other project seemed more tangible. It gave us confidence to take
on other projects afterwards." 

- aluno 5: "[talking about a bug in an Linux driver] In order to fix that we
would have to write from scratch a new operating mode for the driver. That was
beyond our knowledge and would take us a lot of time, so we mentioned the
problem in the lore, but decided not to work on that."

- aluno 5: "We had the chance to work real-world large projects that are used
daily by thousands of people worldwide. We gained confidence to work on open
source projects, to understand and propose changes to large software and we
practiced the use of day-today tools like git, github and gitlab. We also saw
firsthand the importance of clean code, good documentation, tests and an active
community, to the long term maintenance of code and to the cooperation of
multiple people on the same project. I hope to contribute to more open source
software after this discipline. "

- aluno 6: "We started this semester being introduced to probably one of the
hardest projects to contribute with: the Linux Kernel. And I don’t say that
because it’s a hard project (in fact, it is, but at the same time I had the fell
that contributing to it is more accessible than I thought before), but because
it requires a great preparation and a knowledge of, besides the code, how to
effectively contribute, like all the rules about formating and sending patches."

- aluno 6: "Even if it didn’t go as we expected, I think I learned a lot in this
process. Working on a code that isn’t mine and specially one in the magnitude of
the Kernel was difficulty, but amazing. I think that was a great way to start
this discipline, gave me a clear idea of how the FLOSS world works and that it’s
more accessible than I thought. The support from the professor and the TAs was
also essential too and I think the workshops in class worked very well."

- aluno 6: "I think the biggest learning from this was about the contribution
process: we received a lot of suggestions and requests of changes in our code,
and it was great! In addition to learning some new bash commands, dealling with
the maintainers was a great experience, and it was even more amazing when I
received the mail informing that our push request was accepted. A great
feeling!"

- aluno 6: "[talking about the Debian packaging phase] about I just think we had
few time to work on this, considering the next phase of the discipline required
a lot of our effort and we were a little late to start it. Maybe with some more
time we could find another software to make a package and then submit."

- aluno 7: "[talking about a patch to the Linux kernel] This project was much
more straightforward than the other one, especially since it was mostly just
refactoring code instead of having to learn how the device worked and what it
would take to add new functionality. I managed to get it done it a day (although
I was already much more familiar with the kernel due to the previous weeks of
studying for ad7292) and submitted my patch, which was a smooth (if
nerve-wracking) process (I did almost send an incomplete test patch to everyone
by accident, but luckily I had –dry-run on). The patch was approved with no
further changes."

- aluno 7: "[talking about contributing to a supporting project to the Linux
kernel] It annoyed me, though, that the documentation was contradicting itself
to the point of actively getting in the way of setting up the program."

- aluno 8: "I’ve never had experience with virtual machines before, and at first
glance, it seemed a bit dense and scary, but overall I think I had a nice
learning curve over this process, it was not the smoothest one. Although the
tutorials explain very nicely the goal, the commands and the meaning behind it,
they do not go deeper into possible problems that may happen."

- aluno 8: "[talking about contributing to the Linux kernel] In general, it was
an interesting experience studying and playing with the kernel, and nicer than I
expected (besides the problems with the VM). "

- aluno 9: "[talking about technical limitations due to setup] But I was on the
other side of this, and felt that all the time, all the classes, I was left
behind because of my laptop, but knew that fixing my bugs and machine problems
would also lead to a good learning process.  I had to be patient and learn with
late steps, and since we ended up grouping, I had to follow up with my groupmate
laptop implementations. This made a bit harder to actually go down with testing,
implementing my ideas or flowing with the development of the issue code itself."

- aluno 9: "[...] I get the feeling that learning comes a lot from struggles and
overheads. So, most of what I learned throughout the discipline was from the
consequences of my problems during tutorials and other situations, rather than
mainly from the contributions.  I have never actually searched, executed,
deleted and created so many stuff inside my operating system, so one of the
things that I learned the most was about the OS itself and how it works on the
real world side."

- aluno 9: "After the entire knowledge obtained through the discipline, on the
beginning of june I found out about a cool open-source project in which I would
really like to contribute."

- aluno 10: "During the study, due to the fact that I didn’t follow exactly the
creation of the directory in these tutorials, I had a small problem completing
these tutorials because I couldn’t find the path of the directory I created, but
after a few attempts, the problem was solved and I finished these three
tutorials successfully.  Even though everything went well here, my partner
#### had a lot of problems with the tutorial because he didn’t read the
instructions and explanatory texts, so his progress was lagging behind the rest
of the class."

- aluno 11: "[falando de dificuldades nos tutoriais] Mas ainda assim, outro erro
persistiu, tornando bem dificil realizar essa parte. Contudo, com ajuda de
alunos e monitores, foi possível resolver o problema ao recomeçar do zero o
tutorial."

- aluno 12: "Após terminar todos os tutoriais, exceto com algumas lacunas nos
tutoriais que naturalmente não consideraria todas as circuntâncias para compilar
o kernel e testar módulos, percebi que a maioria dos problemas que tive com
erros foi devido à falta de conhecimento que tinha com a linguagem e
gerenciamento de arquivos para compilar o kernel, que foram obtidos com o
preceder do fluxo."

- aluno 12: "[talking about a free software project that is not related to the
Linux kernel] I’m very pleased with the contribution and thank the reviewers who
kindly helped me with the integration process. I hope to be able to make further
contributions in the future."

- aluno 13: "[falando sobre dificuldades nos tutoriais] A partir dai, tive
problemas com comandos que não estavam bem descritos onde eram para serem
rodados também (e passei um bom tempo tentando descobrir)."

- aluno 14: "[talking about conceiving a Linux kernel patch] The initial
challenge was to understand how each function works, since the kernel uses very
low-level libraries, we had to search line by line in existing header files
included in our driver and read its documentation."

- aluno 14: "[talking about difficulties on implementing a Linux kernel patch]
But we have faced a problem: one of the drivers recommended by #### was too
complicated to fix because we couldn’t test them properly, since we didn’t have
the proper hardware to do it."

- aluno 14: "I am very happy with my first acceptance in a open-source project
that nobody knw me. They trusted and reviewed my work and now I can use it, as
Nushell is present on my daily basis use."

- aluno 15: "Uma parte bem legal da disciplina foram as palestras. Tivemos a
oportunidade de aprender diretamente com profissionais que já trabalham na área,
incluindo pessoas que ocupam posições em grandes empresas e mantenedores de
projetos open source, complementando nossos estudos teóricos e práticos. Vale um
destaque para a palestra do kernel e como contribuir para ele. Aprendemos sobre
a estrutura do kernel, os desafios de manter um projeto dessa magnitude e as
melhores práticas para enviar patches. Outro destaque foi a palestra de licenças
com o ####, explicando detalhadamente as diferenças entre as principais licenças
open source, como GPL, MIT e Apache, e suas implicações para desenvolvedores e
usuários. Para mim, foram assuntos totalmente novos que nunca tinha parado para
me preocupar até então, foi bem legal ouvir sobre esse tópico e começar a
prestar mais atenção nisso em projetos que eu participar."

- aluno 15: "No início da disciplina, seguimos tutoriais sobre o kernel Linux.
Acredito que essa foi uma das partes mais desafiadoras para mim, pois ainda
estávamos no começo da disciplina, estava um pouco perdida e tive muita
dificuldade com os tutoriais iniciais de set up, demorei bastante para conseguir
terminá-los, incluindo um problema grande na minha máquina por estar com os
programas desatualizados, [...]"

- aluno 15: "A disciplina #### foi uma experiência transformadora. Antes
dessa disciplina, não entendia porque alguém administraria um software livre,
porque aceitar contribuição de qualquer um poderia ser uma boa opção já que
achava que podia ter problemas de segurança, não entendia nada de licenças. Em 4
meses, aprendi sobre kernel, licenças, empacotamento, contribuições práticas
para projetos open source e, o mais importante, desmetificar tudo que pensava
sobre software livre. Estou ansiosa para continuar essa jornada em disciplinas
futuras e contribuir cada vez mais com o ecossistema de software livre."

- aluno 16: "Entering a Kernel community is a big challenge, and getting started
with something simple as tests may be a good path. There is a lot of things to
learn, and much more to do, but I’m really excited with all the evolution I’ve
had so far :)"

- aluno 17: "Em geral gostei bastante da disciplina. Foi bem trabalhosa, mas em
geral aprender sobre a história e filosofia de software livre, junto com ter
experiências práticas contribuindo em diversos projetos, assim como ter
palestras de profissionais na área foi algo muito interessante. Toda a
experiência de programação me deixou mais experiente em git e bash, e me deu uma
ideia de como é todo o fluxo de desenvolvimento no software livre, examinando
issues para ver com o que eu poderia contribuir, realizando os PRs e respondendo
ao feedback dos mantenedores, esse tipo de coisa. A contribuição para o kernel
do linux acabou sendo bem pequena, mas pelo menos aprendi como funciona para
mandar um patch, todo o processo de instalar uma VM com o kernel do linux, e de
mandar email para os mantenedores com as mudanças, ou com o git send email ou
com o kw mail."

- aluno 18: "[talking about a coding style Linux kernel patch] Creating a simple
patch like this was easy. At every kernel tree you download, there is a scripts
folder, with a bunch of nice stuff in there.  One of them is the checkpath.pl
script. This script checks source code, checking spelling and cosmetic mistakes.
With this, you can find easy stuff to fix in the kernel. Almost like
free-real-state.  Creating a patch was easy, thanks to git.  In a nutshell, just
create a new branch, make your changes, commit, generate the patch, check your
path with checkpath.pl(yes here it is again!), sign-off, and send it to
maintainers. Seems simple. Is Hard."